JavaScript - Browser Object Model

comments
The Browser Object Model (BOM) in JavaScript helps to interact with the browser, not just the webpage. While the DOM handles the content of the page, BOM gives you control over things like the browser window, the URL, and the history. This means you can do things like resize the window, go back and forth in the browser history, or even find out what browser the user is using. In short, BOM helps JavaScript work with the browser to make web pages more interactive.

javascript_bom_browser_object_model_
Javascript BOM
Browser Object Model Types
Here are the main parts of the Browser Object Model (BOM)

Object	Description
window	Represents the browser window, controlling aspects like size and location, and serves as the global object.
navigator	Provides details about the user's browser and operating system.
location	Manages the current URL, allowing for retrieval and modification of the web address.
screen	Offers information about the user's screen, such as its width and height.
history	Provides access to the browser's session history, enabling navigation through the user's browsing history.
Let's see each part of the Browser Object Model in more detail.

1. Window Object
The window object is the main object in the BOM, representing the browser window or tab itself. It's the top-level object, and everything else in the browser is contained within it.


window.alert('Hello, World!');
console.log(window.innerWidth); 
The window object provides methods like alert(), confirm(), and prompt().
It also gives you access to other important objects, such as document, navigator, screen, location, and history.
window object - output 
Window Object
2. Navigator Object
The navigator object provides information about the browser and the user's environment. It is often used to detect the browser type or features.


console.log(navigator.userAgent); 
console.log(navigator.language); 
navigator.userAgent can be used to identify the browser and its version, but it's not always reliable.
navigator.language tells you the user's preferred language.
hello
Navigator Object
3. Location Object
The location object allows you to interact with the URL of the current document. It can be used to retrieve or manipulate parts of the URL and navigate to different pages.


console.log(location.href); 
location.href = 'https://www.google.com/'
location.href gives you the full URL.
You can change location.href to load a different page.
Screenshot-2025-01-21-152426
Location Object
location object Properties

location.href: Returns the full URL of the current page, including the protocol, domain, path, and query string.
location.protocol: Returns the protocol part of the URL (e.g., https: or http:).
location.hostname: Returns the domain name or IP address of the URL (e.g., www.example.com).
location.pathname: Returns the path part of the URL after the domain (e.g., /path/to/page).
4. Screen Object
The screen object provides information about the user’s screen, such as its resolution.


console.log(screen.width);
console.log(screen.height); 
screen.width and screen.height give you the screen's dimensions.
This can be useful for adapting your website's layout to different screen sizes.
Screenshot-2025-01-21-152931
Screen Object
5. History Object
The history object allows you to navigate through the browser's session history. It provides methods to move forward, backward, or to specific pages in the history stack.To see the working of history object you can run this code on the browser.


history.back(); 
history.forward(); 
history.back() goes back one page.
history.forward() goes forward one page.
6. Using window.resizeTo
The window.resizeTo() method is used to resize the browser window to a specific width and height. This can be useful for controlling window dimensions in a web application.


let newWindow = window.open("https://www.example.com/", "NewWindow", "width=500,height=500");
newWindow.resizeTo(300, 300);
Output

Screenshot-2025-02-19-155953
Using window.resizeTo
window.open("https://www.example.com/", "NewWindow", "width=500,height=500") opens a new browser window with the URL https://www.example.com/ The window is named "NewWindow", and its size is set to 500px by 500px.
newWindow.resizeTo(300, 300) resizes the newly opened window to 300px by 300px. This resizing happens after the window is opened.
Key Features of the BOM
Dynamic Browser Control: The BOM allows developers to control browser windows and perform operations like resizing, opening, and closing windows.
URL Manipulation: Through the location object, developers can retrieve, modify, and navigate URLs dynamically.
Browser and Device Information: The navigator object provides details about the user's browser, operating system, and hardware capabilities.
Screen and Resolution Access: Developers can access screen properties like width, height, and pixel depth for responsive design.
Session History Navigation: The history object enables smooth navigation through the user's browsing history.
Cookie Management: Using the document.cookie property, developers can set, retrieve, and delete cookies for session management.
Event Handling and Timers: Functions like setTimeout and setInterval allow scheduling and periodic execution of tasks.s the current web address (URL) and allows changes within the Browser Object Model (BOM).